Atelectasis is one of the most common and
often preventable respiratory complications you'll encounter
as a respiratory therapist.
At its core, atelectasis is the collapse
of alveoli,
leading to reduced or absent gas exchange
in affected areas of the lung.
Think of it as a ventilation problem
first.
When alveoli collapse, ventilation drops,
but
perfusion may still be present.
This creates a shunt-like effect, where
blood passes through
the lungs without being oxygenated.
The result?
Hypoxemia that does not always respond
well to oxygen alone.
So what causes atelectasis?
It typically falls into three main
categories.
Obstructive, where something like mucus
plugging blocks airflow and causes
distal collapse.
Compressive, where external pressure, like
pleural
effusion or pneumothorax, prevents lung
expansion.
And adhesive, where surfactant dysfunction
allows alveoli to collapse more
easily, often seen in conditions like
ARDS.
Clinically, patients may present with
decreased breath sounds,
crackles, or even silent areas depending
on severity.
You might see increased work of breathing,
tachypnea,
and declining oxygen saturation.
On imaging, look for signs like lung
volume loss,
mediastinal shift toward the affected
side, or areas of increased
density.
Here's the key RT mindset shift.
Atelectasis is not just a diagnosis.
It's a recruitment problem.
Your goal is to reopen alveoli and keep
them open.
That means focusing on lung expansion
therapies.
Incentive spirometry, CPAP, PEEP,
early mobilization, and effective
secretion clearance all play a role.
If the cause is mucus plugging, airway
clearance becomes your
priority.
If it's post-op shallow breathing, pain
control and deep
breathing exercises are critical.
Red flags include worsening hypoxemia,
increasing work of breathing,
or failure to improve with initial
interventions.
That's when you escalate.
Consider non-invasive support or further
diagnostic evaluation.
For board exams, remember this,
atelectasis
equals alveolar collapse, decreased lung
volumes,
and shunt physiology.
Treatment is all about recruitment and
prevention.
As an RT, you are the frontline defense
against atelectasis.
Your assessments, interventions, and
patient coaching
directly impact outcomes.